Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Loops. And today I'm
joined for a second time by Dr Joseph Leo.
He is the Ariel Lucy Moses, Professor of Science
at New York University. Last time we talked about
his book, The Deep History Of Ourselves. I'm leaving
a link to it in the description of the
interview. And today we're talking about his latest book,
The Four Realms Of Existence, a new Theory of
being human. So, Doctor Ludo, welcome back to the
show. It's always a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you for having me again mccarter.
So, just to introduce the topic here uh in
the book, you go through four realms of what
you call uh existence, bodily, neural, cognitive and conscious.
We're going to talk about each of them. But
at the very beginning of the book, one of
the first things you touch on is the idea
of mind, body dualism. So where do you think
it stems from? And why is it important to
refer to it in the context of your book?
Exactly what I refer to it as a way
to dispose of it, not to uh celebrate it
then. Sure, you know, traditionally, mind body dualism goes
back in, you know, to dear, um I mean,
long before him, but he had a particular kind
of mind, body dualism called interaction is where the,
the soul or the mind could interact with the
body through the famous pineal gland. That, that was
the idea. And so philosophers ever since uh have
been struggling with, you know, mind and body and
are they separate or are they different kinds of
uh uh substances and so forth? And to me
in, in scientific times where we, we live now
where we've, you know, discovered DNA and we know
all about, you know, atoms and molecules. Um YOU
know, if, if you start talking about looking for
a spirit in the brain, you're looking for something
that is not physical in the brain, you're never
gonna find that. And that's the whole problem for
me with uh my colleague David Chalmers and uh
Tom Nago, both of whom are at NYU. I
don't believe that the, the qualia are ineffable uh
non-physical entities. You know, that's fine for a philosophical
theory, but it's a nonstarter for a scientific theory.
If it's not physical, you can't study it. So
it's not science. And with one thing that happens
is that, you know, science and philosophy were once
kind of, you know, way back, like in the
19th century, there was a lot of interaction, but
then it kind of they fell apart. And right
now where we are is at a situation where
philosophy has come in and is providing all of
the conceptual major points from which scientists pursue things
like consciousness. And I, you know, I think it's,
it's useful to have a, a philosophical theory as
a grounding point, but it should really be a
starting point. And you can't expect the science that
results from that starting point to always adhere to
the philosophical theory because science is gonna discover things
and the the dualist cling, you know, cling to
the idea that we're never gonna find out how
qual works because it's non-physical. So if that's true,
it's a nonstarter scientifically. So either it's physical or
it's not scientific.
So one very interesting thing that you also talk
about in your book is how you collaborated in
studies with split brain patients. So, I mean, in
what ways does that connect to the ideas you
explore in your book? And why did you get
interested in those kinds of studies?
Well, there are two questions there. Um The first,
the first one, you know, I had two degrees
in business administration and marketing. I had a master's
in marketing and undergraduate and business administration. And I
took a course with a guy who was uh
studying learning and emotion that was his class. And
I thought that would be relevant to marketing. But
instead what he was doing was studying rat brains
and memory he had worked with the esteemed Carl
Lashley and was trying to do what lash he
failed to do just to find memory in the
brain. And he, um you know, I fell in
love with what he was doing. It was just
so fantastic. I was just a small kid from
small town in Louisiana. And, you know, I didn't
know you could study the brain. And so that
became fantastic and I worked with him for a
few months. And then I said, this is what
I wanna do. And he gave me a um
a uh uh wrote me a letter and I
got accepted into Stony Brook uh out on Long
Island to do my phd. And that's where I
met Mike Kana and Mike and I um kind
of hit it off right away. He had done
his phd studying split brain patients and um in
California at Caltech and he was about 10 years
older than me, still kind of a young guy.
Um And we came across this new set of
patients in uh up in New England that had
been just operated on. And so we started doing
the same old stuff that, that you normally do
with split brain patients. You know, like, you know,
you show stimulus to the left visual field who
goes to the right hemisphere, you say to the
patient, what did you see the left hemisphere is
the talking hemisphere? It says I didn't see anything
but the left hand can reach into a bag
and pull an apple out if we had shown
it a picture of an apple. So we were
doing the same old stuff again over and over
again. It wasn't going anywhere. There was nothing new
really uh until we came across one patient and
home. Um We, for some reason, I forget why,
but we put words in the right hemisphere just
to see if it could read anything. You know,
one of the big issues in split brain patients
has always been, is there someone home in the
left hemisphere or is all of the the conscious
stuff coming out of the, I'm sorry, is there
someone home in the right hemisphere? Because the left
hemisphere is the conscious one you talk to and
so forth. Um And it's been difficult, it was
difficult to know because you could only use nonverbal
responses to test that, you know, could it point
to a picture and stuff. So that was uh
that, that's where things stood. But we happened to
put some words in the right hemisphere and gave
the boy a bunch of Scrabble letters uh to
see if he could spell what he saw, what
letters he saw in the right hemisphere. Or we,
you know, we could have put a picture like
apple and then he would spell with his uh
uh left hand A PPLE so he read, he
could read the pictures or he could take, he
could see an apple and turn it into words
with his left hand or he could put picture,
you could put a picture uh sorry, put the
words in the right hemisphere and he could spell
the name of the thing or point to the
picture of the thing from his right hemisphere. So
he could read in his right hemisphere, but he
couldn't talk from it. So we said, OK, that's
interesting if you can read common words there. But
does he have uh a social sense? You know,
we asked, we put the letters in the left
visual field, what is your name? And the left
hand came out and it spells his name, Paul.
So OK, he knows who he is over there.
He is not just a, you know, smart champ
chimpanzee, there's a human being over there that knows
its name, it knew his girlfriend's name. You know,
when you say who's your girlfriend? He spells Liz
um and on and on. And so we, we
asked the right hemisphere what it wanted to be
when I grow up, what would the occupation be
the right hemisphere said race car driver and the
left hemisphere in conversation wants to be an architect.
So we've got one hemisphere with one goal in
life, another hemisphere with another goal in life and
they were different. So it clearly there was a,
a kind of conscious self on both sides of
the brain. And that was the first time that,
that, that had ever been fully demonstrated, people assumed
there was someone awake and alive in the the
right hemisphere, but you could never have a conversation
with that person. So that was a real breakthrough.
And then, but the, the key experiments we did
uh in terms of both my career going forward
and Mike's was we put a um two pictures,
one on the left side of the screen, one
on the right side of the screen, the right
side of the screen goes to the left hemisphere
there. We, we saw, we put a chicken claw,
you know, just the the claw of the chicken
picture. Yeah. In the left to the left visual
field, we, we put a uh um the snow
scene. OK. So the left hemisphere saw a chicken
claw, the right hemisphere saw a snow scene. So
the right hand because it's a, a snow scene
pointed to a shovel and the left hand because
it's a chicken claw pointed to a chicken. So
we knew why he did that. But so when
we asked the left hemisphere, why did you pick
those? He said, well, I saw a chicken claws
so pointed to a chicken and you need to
shovel to clean out the chicken shed. The left
hemisphere knew nothing about the snow scene. It made
up a story, observing the two hands and what
they were pointing to one was controlled by the
the left hemisphere So, you know, at first we
kind of thought, well, this is just normal kind
of neurological confabulation to make up for a deficit
that you have because often neurological patients do uh
confabulate. But then, you know, the more we thought
about it, this was just something that we all
do all the time that we, a lot of
our behavior is produced non consciously, like, you know,
I just ro rock back in the chair. I
waved my hand um or you're driving down the
road and you're not not paying attention, but you're
driving fine, you know, all kinds of things we
do are done non consciously. We're talking non consciously,
you and I are not planning each sentence, we
say it just comes out. Um And so if
we have all these nonconscious systems in our brain
producing behaviors, uh it helps if we can kind
of put it all together and, and make our
non conscious behavior, make sense with our sense of
who we are in, in a, a more cognitive
sense of who we are. And so the idea
we had was that it's, you know, if you
have any sense of free will, I, I think
we have some free will. Yeah. Um Then it's,
it's disturbing, it causes cognitive dissonance. If you think
that you are not in charge of your behavior,
right? If we, if you're doing things that aren't
in your control, it can, can be a source
of cognitive distance. So our idea was that the
human brain evolved a kind of mechanism to resolve
this dissonance in the fact that consciousness on our
conscious minds don't have conscious access to a lot
of the behavior we do. But to make everything
seem right most of the time and not have
to be kind of always questioning. Did I do
that? Did I not do that? We have this
sense of being able to cognitively interpret our behavior
and our thoughts and, and, and other things and
make sense of them in light of who we
think we are. In other words, we generate narrations
to explain who we are. And so ever since
that, that evening in uh Bennington Vermont, which is
where the patient lived. And we were talking about
this at the bar. I've been kind of obsessed
with that idea and so has Mike and we
both have written books about all this and um
I went on to, you know, I, I was
interested in emotion and we decided emotions might be
one of the systems in the brain that would
require or demand these dissonance, reducing explanations. Because if
you see, if you have all these unconscious emotion
systems that cause you to freeze or run or
to do things you don't want to do or
you didn't or don't necessarily plan doing um to,
to resolve that dissonance, we tell a story. Uh
And that story is an emotional story about who
we are and why we did what we do.
So, uh you know, I, I didn't have patience
anymore to uh to study. Um So I had
to find something else to do and I turned
to studies of rats because I assumed we could
find that we could study emotional behaviors in rats.
And the same systems would be involved in these
unconscious emotional behaviors in humans. Even though I couldn't
study emotional consciousness in humans, I could study the
behaviors that might be generating these dissonance inducing uh
uh uh uh narrations in us. So that was
the basic idea. And I went on for, you
know, my first grant on emotion and rats was
rejected because the uh study section said neuroscientists don't
study emotions. Um It was, you know, still the
behaviorist era in a sense. And then the um
the next comment was, and besides you're doing Pavlovian
conditioning and you didn't use a non associative control
group. So I was, I was really mad, you
know, to get those comments, but I saw the
writing on the wall that behaviorism still was a
very strong force in psychology, especially especially in the
study of animal behavior. And it still is today,
by the way, it, it has not gone away.
Um So if I was gonna survive by studying
Pavlovian conditioning, which is what I was doing, I
had to add that control group, but I also
had to disguise myself as a learning and memory
researcher in order to get my grants and to
stay funded uh because emotion was not something that
was gonna fly. That at that time, this is
the mid 19 eighties. So I started going to
learning and memory meetings and uh became, you know,
a well known researcher studying fear conditioning and, and
the Amygdala and all of that, I didn't go
looking for the Amygdala. The brain took me to
the Amygdale. Now I had, I had uh spent
10 years in a neurobiology lab where there were
every technique you could need to study the brain.
Um And so when I was studying rats, I
wanted to know how does the tone go into
the rat's ear and then come out of the
rat's body in the form of a freezing behavior
or a change in blood pressure and heart rate
that's metabolically supporting that freezing behavior. So it was
a question of how you get from the input
to the output. Now, in the Alesia, Eric Kandel
and, and others uh made very quick work of
that because they had a simple stimulus. They were
using like Pavlovian conditioning too and a very rigid
response, the gill withdrawal reflects of the Alesia. And
you know, I was using Pavlovian conditioning. I had
a simple stimulus, a tone paired with a shock
and a simple behavior, freezing behavior. It was an
innate behavior. So I said I can connect the
dots in the brain too. So what I, I
didn't start at the ear because you lesion the
ear, then you're not gonna hear anything, start at
the auditory cortex. But because the auditory cortex and
the rat had never been formally mapped, uh we
had to map it because I had all those
new anatomical techniques. I'd learned as a postdoc, we
were able to quickly map the auditory cortex with
tracing studies that showed us where we had to
remove the auditory cortex to see if that was
involved in the conditioning. We took it out on
both sides of the brain and the rats could
still be conditioned. So how do you, how does
the stimulus go from the auditory thalamus to some
part of the brain that controls the behavior if
it's not going through the auditory cortex? What we
looked at our tracing studies, anatomical studies and there
were connections from the medial geniculate nucleus, not just
to the cortex, but also to the uh um
hypothalamus, the co cate putamen, the uh uh some
intralaminar thalamic nuclei and the Amygdala. So we leach
lesion each one of those and only the Amygdala
had an effect. So now we know the stimulus
has to go to the Amygdala to do the
trick, get the behavior up. OK. So we said,
well, it's not the whole Amygdala because the tracer
was only in one part, the lateral amygdala coming
from the, thus you, so the auditory thalamic input
to the Amygdala was to the lateral nucleus. So
we, yeah, OK. That made sense. So a lot
of sensory information is coming in there. And so
we started focusing on that. We showed that you
could induce um uh I I if you record
it from cells there. Well, first we lesion the
lateral amygdala in that block conditioning. Uh If we
put electrodes in there, we could record the activity
of the cells during conditioning. If we electrically stimulated
the inputs from the thalamus to the lateral amygdala,
we could induce LTP in the lateral amygdala. Um
And so on. So we had a, a lot
of evidence that the lateral amygdala was kind of
the learning center for fear conditioning. And so the
question then is how does it go from the
lateral amygdala down to the body? Well, another researcher,
Bruce Cap had implicated the central nucleus of the
amygdala in the control of certain cardiovascular responses following
Pavlovian conditioning. So we've uh tracing studies found connections
from the lateral to the central amygdala and that,
you know, that kind of closed the circle right
there. Uh But for the freezing behavior, we have
to find a different output because the uh the
cardiovascular responses were going down to the brain stem
to control the parasympathetic nervous system. Uh But what
we found was that for the freezing behavior, it
had to go from the central amygdala to the
periaqueductal great and from there, down to the motor
systems that control. So within, you know, very small
number of years, we were able to, to go
from the ear to the muscles, basically that control
the responses. And the trick was following the, the
invertebrate model where you have a simple stimulus and
a, a very well established, you know, hardwired response
that is uh basically a reflex that you just
con connect the uh the inputs to. And uh
so that was really the beginning of my, my
career. Um I was right around that time, I
was moving to NYU. And the day of the
MO the week before I arrived, there was an
article written up in the New York Times. Science
Times uh called brains design emerges as key to
emotion. And that article was written by Dan Goldman
who went on to make very popular the idea
of emotional intelligence. Um He was writing from the
New York Times at the time and he'd done
a lot of research on my work. And what
he was particularly fascinated with was the subcortical input
to the Amygdala that control behavior without it going
through the cortex. I call that the low road,
whereas the cortical route to the Amygdala of the
high road. Um But we didn't need the high
road. All you needed was the low road. And
so the idea was that you could have the,
the driving of emotional behavior by the thalamic to
Amygdala pathway uh which would be producing the behavior
unconsciously getting back to my whole idea of these
unconscious behaviors. So you could control the behavior unconsciously,
the Freudians went wild. Finally, there was some evidence
for unconscious control of emotional behavior. Um Goldman's f
uh uh book on the emotional intelligence, I think
the first like several chapters were all about my
work. So it was uh it was good for
me and it was good for him. So we
both kind of got something out of that. It
really gave me kind of a public presence of
year or two. After that, I wrote the emotional
brain because I had some, you know, cache with
the public at that point because my name was
getting out. So in the emotional brain, I described
all the Pavlovian conditioning work. Uh BUT also wrote
about how consciousness of emotions comes about, which is
through the high road going to the prefrontal cortex
allowing you to cognitively interpret the situation that you're
in. So from the beginning, I talked about emotional
behaviors as being unconscious. But the emotional experience being
conscious through separate pathways. I tried calling the uh
the unconscious pathway, implicit fear and high road explicit
fear. But that didn't take off in uh emotion
the way it did in memory research because still
a lot of the people doing the behavioral work
were behaviorist and they didn't believe in consciousness. So
they didn't need to talk about unconscious because you
don't have any consciousness. There's no unconscious to contrast
it with. So they just ignored the implicit, explicit
and just talked about fear as behavior. And so
for decades, this was like an imperceptible itch that
I needed to scratch. I would be introduced at
lectures as someone who discovered how fear comes out
of the Amygdala. And I would say it's not
quite right. You know, because I'm talking about the
fear behavior. I'm not studying the fear and emotion
experience in the rap that has to be done
in humans. Uh But time after time, I would
be introduced the same way because, you know, it's
very useful sometimes for your science to be distributed
to the public. But uh sometimes that the public's
perception of the science comes back into the science
and becomes what the scientists think, right? And so
there was, there was um my colleagues, uh the
behaviorist colleagues who didn't like the fact that um
uh you know, I was talking about emotion and,
and consciousness and so forth, um would think of
fear in the behavior sense as a stimulus response
relationship. So fear was not and a, a mental
state in the Amygdala or anywhere else, it was
the functional relationship between an outside stimulus and a
response to that stimulus. Now, in the middle of
the 20th century, some behaviors became physiologists. So the
intervening variable, it was introduced by Tolman in the
1919 twenties. Um So for these physiologists in the
early in the middle of the 20th century. Uh
WHAT the Amygdala was doing for fear was providing
a physiological state of fear that connects stimulus and
response. Not a subjective, no, no, no conscious fear.
Just a something they called the physiology of fear
just as the behaviors talked about the circuit as,
as fear. So uh you have that uh going
on and the um pretty soon again, everybody is
still talking about fear. So the, the question you
wonder is why did the behaviorist get rid of
conscious fear? But still call the behavior fear because
for most people fear would be the subjective experience.
And it's because they didn't believe that there was
anything in the head, right? So they could just
call it fear. And since there was just no
conscious or unconscious with them, it was just fear.
Um So by 2012, I was really annoyed um
with all of this, I thought bad language. And
so I started writing articles like, um rethinking the
emotional brain where I said it's what the Amygdala
does is detects in response to threats. That's an
ancient evolutionary process that goes all the way back
to the beginning of animal life and into in
the, in the uh 2019 book, The Deep History
of Ourselves. I said it goes all the way
back to the first bacterial cell. You have to
be able to detect and respond to danger. You
have to have something on your membrane that prevents
you from swimming into toxic water. And something on
your membrane that allows you to swim towards uh
food. So the their membrane was able to guide
them towards survival behaviors like this. And I'm not
saying that we inherited, you know, for example, freezing
behavior from bacteria. But instead what, what I said
in the book was that the earliest cells develop
what it, what was necessary for the cell to
stay alive. Those became the key components of a
cell of cellular life. So what was passed on
was the survival needs of the cell, not how
you satisfy those survival needs, right? So, bacteria survive
by approaching food in one way and avoiding danger
in another way, but they do it. They have
no, you know, their bodies are very primitive when
you get into animals that have different kinds of
bodies, for example, um a sponge, the body of
the sponge is very different from the body of
a jellyfish which vold sponges. But so they acquire
food and protection in different ways. They, they, they
have to have the same survival requirements, but they
implement it in different ways. Take mammals, some mammals
run away from danger, some fly away from danger,
some swim away from danger. Uh You have all
kinds of ways of responding to danger. That's not
what's been inherited. What's been inherited is the imperative
or the need to detect danger to incorporate nutrients
and balanced fluids to uh uh detect danger and
move away from it, um, and so forth. So,
and to reproduce. Of course. So, um I, what,
what I was proposing in the d in the,
this book, this article, um uh rethinking the emotion
of brain was to stop calling things that weren't
mental states, mental states. You know, it's, it's simple.
So I started with a quote in that article
from, uh Tinbergen who was very well respected. But
he said that our, that our Presumptions about what
hunger and fear and uh uh all of these
emotions are in other animals are mere guesses. We
have no idea what's going on. We should, we
should talk about them in different ways. He was,
you know, basically saying let's not anthropomorphize on the
basis of behavior because we don't know what's going
on in the hip. So I wrote that I
wrote all kinds of other articles like uh one
was called um Semantics Surplus Meaning and the science
of fear. It's about how throughout history, there have
been uh scientists who have questioned the way the
scientific language is used and that I think that's
very important that we not mistreat our language or
misuse our language. For example, each, each field is
different. So in biology, there's a gene called hedgehog.
So when a biologist talks about hedgehog, n, no
one thinks they're talking about a hedgehog, right? It's
just a nickname in psychology and neuroscience. We have
a different relationship to these words, when we use
a mental state word, like fear to talk about
a brain circuit that controls an innate behavior. That's
not fear. That's a defensive response. If we call
it fear, everybody thinks fear is living in the
Amygdala. And that's how we got to all these
problems. And that's why the entire medical, medical industry
to treat psychiatric disorders doesn't really work because you
develop animal models and you use, you test drugs
that make them freeze less and you think because
the rat froze less a human will feel less
fearful and less anxious. But instead, what you find
is the patient is less avoidant. They, they go
to the party a little easier and they're less
aroused so they can stay in the party a
little easier, but they're still anxious and fearful, you
know. But if so, if the drugs were sold,
not as anti anxiety pills, but as coping pills,
you know, anxiety coping pills, you'd be able to
take the drug and understand that what you can
do is use it to help you cope with
the physical symptoms. And then psychologically you'd be in
a better position to re evaluate your situation. So
I talk about it some time in terms of
first, you have to tame the Amygdala. This is
metaphorically not, not clear away. Sure change the Amygdala
because spider phobics don't wanna see spider pho pho
uh see spiders when they're doing. Uh LIKE cognitive
behavioral therapy. So one way you might do that
is subliminal presentation of spiders to spider phobics. They
would never consciously know they're there, but it might
extinguish the Amygdala. I don't know which I've promoted
that for a while, but I don't know anyone
who's done it. So, um, tame the Amygdala, you
might do that with cognitive behavioral therapy or uh
distraction. If you can keep the conscious mind distracted
while still being extinguished, you know, that might work.
Um Second, you want to tame the hippocampus, rewrite
some of those memories about who you think you
are and what your labels are and, and so
forth and just re narrate your, your score if
you, you know, because a lot of what we
do to that gets us in trouble psychologically is
our narrations about the situation and who we are.
And if we can narrate in, maybe we can
narrate it out. And then third, once you've done
those two things, the brain is ready for psychotherapy,
regular talk therapy. But if, if the therapist has
to deal with an anxious body and um uh
a bad memories and you know, and at the
same time, try to do the kind of, you
know, mono, mono or woman or woman oh exchange,
it's too much to be done at one time.
Do them separately, get rid of the most basic
first or tame those first tame the cognitive memories
second and then you can have a, a better
time talking. That would be my, we haven't gotten
very far on this all day. Right. Talking too
much.
No. But, but, but then tell us that related
to this latest book, how did you get that,
this idea of four realms of existence, the bo
the neural, the cognitive and the conscious and how
do they relate to one another?
Um You know, it's like I how, it's how
the question is, how do I start writing that
book? And it's, this is true of every book.
It's just you get one idea like in deep
history, it was like, you know, I, I made
the connection between OK, I had been studying molecules
involved in Pavlovian conditioning that I were borrowing. I
was bing those molecules from Eric Kandel who studied
Alesia, you know, C with A MP and uh
PK A all kinds of uh molecular tools. And
so, you know, we would do that and we,
we, we could show that we could block LTP
with those and we could block uh Pavlovian conditioning
with those. And so we were using, using the
same molecules that were used by animals that had
a 630 million year difference between the ones we
were using and the ones KD were using because
the common ancestor of the so-called protos dome invertebrates
and the vertebrates was 630 million years ago, a
flatworm, bilateral flat worm with a little brain. So
that became the invertebrates and the vertebrates. So it
dawned on me one day that, you know that,
how, how did that, how do we have the
same molecules in these groups that are so diverged?
Well, one possibility is they separately evolved them. But
the other possibility is that they inherited those from
the common ancestor. And the common ancestor is this
flat worm that genetic, you know, modern genetics is
able to go into fossils and stuff and, and
pick out things that that existed back then. And
sure enough, some of those molecules were there and
we still have living ancestors of the flat worm.
For example, jellyfish, they have those molecules, not all,
not everyone, not, but they have synaptic plasticity molecules.
Now, sponges don't have a nervous system, but they
have synaptic plasticity molecules and protozoa, the single cell
organisms from which all animals evolved also have the
the molecules, what are they doing with synaptic plasticity
molecules but no nervous system? So that was the
wrong question. The question is how did the molecules
that the protozoa have get converted? Or uh uh
you know, what do you call it? Uh YOU
know, borrowed to make synaptic plasticity molecules because evolution
doesn't make things new. It takes stuff you have
and kind of modifies it. So, and you could
go even further back with those molecules. So and
and it turns out that uh you know, these
protozoa uh behave, they detect danger and, and move
away from it. Um And not only that they
undergo Pavlovian conditioning. So, and if you go into
bacteria, they also undergo Pavlovian conditioning and have behavior.
So the point is that when we talk about
these, these survival behaviors to call them emotions and
attach that emotion word to them, does them disservice?
They have been there very, very long in the
history of life. And we need to pay respect
to what they are and not over attribute things
to them. They don't make fear. Fear is the
cognitive interpretation of the situation you're in. So back
to why I started writing the four realms. So,
um I, I was uh writing a series of
articles uh for Current Biology. The, the editor there,
Jeff uh uh had uh you know, he, he
liked the way I wrote uh one or I
wrote this review for him called the Amygdala, which
was one of their best reviewed most viewed reviews
and uh in their history at that point. So
he asked me to write some more articles and
these are great because all you have to do
is write like I don't a couple of 1000
words, there's no peer review. He, he's the peer
reviewer. If it passes his muster, it's kind of
like you can say whatever you want. It's called
my word. So it's my word. It's not anybody
else's word and it just like allows you to
explore some ideas and one of the ideas I
explored in one of the articles was the um
uh the starting point was um you know, what
is, what is consciousness and, and um uh how,
why do we have all this extra philosophical stuff
associated with it? And, you know, maybe we need,
maybe we could get more uh focus. And one
of the, one of the things that came out
of it was to explore the idea of, of
uh narrations as a way of um the of
uh kind of populating our conscious experiences. And so
I started thinking about that and um then I
should, you know, I don't, I can't remember the
exact sequence. But ultimately, I, I started if I
have this, if I'm saying, OK, I've got all
this stuff that's going back in evolution that is
kind of layered into the human body and brain,
right? Um What I've, the deep history of ourselves
I said was about the way we were, but
the four realms of existence is about the way
we are. It's about the same things that it's
kind of like looking back in evolution. So we've
got, you know, an evolutionarily programmed body that we've
borrowed from our ancestors that didn't, that only had
bodies. So, you know, some animals um uh only
animals that have uh let's say, I wouldn't say
this, some organisms only exist biologically, all single cell
organisms only exist biologically. Um EVEN in the multicellular
organisms plants and fungi only exist biologically. They don't
have a nervous system. So only animals have a
nervous system. So only animals can exist neuro biologically.
And that offers a lot of advantages, right? Because
neurobiological existence allows you to control your body in
unique ways for, you know, obtaining food, avoiding danger,
uh getting your, your liquids and so forth. Uh
YOU can do that much more effectively, but it's,
it's a much more challenging job and you need
a lot more metabolism than you have as just
a pure biological organism. So, if we think of
like the biological organism unit is a system for
metabolism that's keeping you alive, generating metabolism, right? And
the first animals were basically an extension of the
biological realm because they developed nervous systems that allowed
the biological realm to do its metabol met meta
meta metabolism. How do you say how they could
like approach metabolism more effectively with a nervous system
than without? So, the uh there's a guy named
Alfred Sherwood Romer, he was a very uh prominent
comparative uh uh paleontologist. Um I had read all,
you know, when I was first starting neuroscience, I've
read a lot of books about that have talked
about um an anim animated and visceral existence in
the body. You know, you got, so you got
the somatic body and the visceral body. Well, Romer
picked up on that in the 19 fifties and
said that we've partitioned the nervous system in the
wrong way. It's not about a central and peripheral
nervous system because central peri and peripheral nervous systems
did not exist as the primary condition of the
nervous system. What existed was you in a, you
take the basic biological needs and you divide those
into visceral and somatic functions. Then the internal and
the external. Um THE central and peripheral components of
the nervous system were not there. In the first
animals like jellyfish, they had diffuse nervous system, nerve
net nerve nets, they had no centralization to speak
of. So, but they had visceral and somatic components.
So that is the primary condition. So we should
think of the body and the nervous system as
a continuous connection of visceral and somatic activities at
the biological level and the neurobiological level. Um AND
the central and peripheral location is just, you know,
how you get the the nerves to the out
of uh uh from one kind of nervous system
to two kinds. You know, it's just AAA way
of of dividing the nerves. But the key thing
is the nerves are pro processing either somatic or
visceral functions. So that came, became very important. And
I had this, this picture uh of one of,
of um how the Amygdala uh connects to the
autonomic nervous system to control, you know, autonomic response,
like blood pressure and heart rate and uh release
of hormones and all of that stuff. And on
the other side of the picture you know, the
Amygdala separated like the A NS component and then
the component that controls freezing behavior or uh escape
behavior and so forth. So I had ma I
had written what Romer de described in my work,
it, it came out of my work that there
was different pathways out of the Amygdala to control
visceral and somatic nervous system. So his thing was
like an eye opener for me. And that became
the foundation for the biological transition to the neurobiological
realm. And then the next transition was the transition
from the mirror neurobiological realm where you have instincts
like, you know, fixed action patterns. As the ethologist
call them reflexes and stimulus response habits. None of
those involve cognition, right? They're automatic responses. So the
next level up is the cognitive level. So there
you can have instrumental responses that are goal directed
and involve cognition. Uh And you then can also
have internal representations of the world that you hold
information in mind and make decisions about and so
forth. But again, all unconsciously and then finally, out
of a very sophisticated cognitive realm, you evolve the
conscious realm. So that was the whole thing. It's
like how one thing led to another, it was
really a continuation of deep history, but just putting
it into our bodies,
right? But how do we get at consciousness? Then?
II I mean, because as many times people again,
going back to the body dualism, I think people
think about consciousness as a sort of, I don't
know, magical out there. But I, I mean, from
a neurobiological and then adding the cognitive perspective, how
do we go from the cognitive level to the
conscious level?
So, one of the things I wrote in the,
in uh the four realms book, and, you know,
I've been writing a psychology today blog for a
long time. But, and with this book, I've written,
you know, kind of summaries of each realm and
in the conscious realm, I wrote a paper recently.
Yeah, these are like short uh you know, thought
pieces. Um I wrote uh one called is Consciousness
Mysterious. And so I said, well, it depends on
what you mean by mysterious. Do you mean mysterious
in the way of a soul that survives death
or in the way that DNA was mysterious before
the uh the inheritance was mysterious before DNA was
discovered. And I think that's the way I think
of consciousness more like the discovery of DNA than
search for the soul that survives death. You know.
So um there, you know, and it's very hard
to, to talk about consciousness because so many people
talk about it as if it's one thing. But
I, I have long been uh following a partition
that in El Toing proposed long ago uh between
auto noetic consciousness, which is self awareness, awareness of
yourself, noetic consciousness, which is knowledge of, of facts
and, and concepts and a noetic consciousness, which is
let's hold that one for a second. It's complicated.
So, but if we, if we just take auto
noetic and noetic and um uh realize that auto
noetic consciousness is based on episodic memory and noetic
consciousness is based on noetic me, on semantic memory.
So, the fact that episodic and semantic memory are
the stepping stones to noetic and auto noetic consciousness
means that you have an anchor in the brain
that takes you pretty close to the consciousness finishing
line, right? It's through episodic memory and through uh
semantic memory that you get there. So tho those
should be the anchor points from which to explore
how consciousness can exist in other ways. And whether
you want to talk about that in terms of
global workspace or in terms of um a higher
order theory which I prefer um you have an
anchor point to build on. So I, I think
it's an underappreciated uh uh kind of tool that,
that we have. Um THE the the third kind
of consciousness is a little weirder. So the third
kind of consciousness is a noetic and that is
a kind of very strange thing that tolling didn't
explain very well. And I, I struggled for many
years. And you know, I had a, I was
very yak pens up and I had very different
ideas about emotion. But we both used tol scheme
and the only thing that was different and, and
solving scheme showed me what was different about what
Yak. And I believe the only thing that was
different is whether the Amygdala was the source of
fear, actual fear or whether it was a lower
order state that had to be resented for the
fear to be experienced. That was my position, the
latter one and the lower the, the, uh, it's
all in the Amygdala State was this, I mean,
it wasn't just Amy Amygdala Perre doctor, right and
so forth. But what many people don't realize that
Yak was not talking about the kind of consciousness
we have. He was talking about the kind of
consciousness that a rat has called a noetic consciousness,
which is as he called in his book, uh
you know, Affect of Neuroscience. He says it's basically
like literally unconscious. It's, it's con it's unconscious consciousness.
It's so primitive that you never experience it unless
it's so intense that it moves up into noetic
consciousness and into auto noetic consciousness. It's like, ok,
you walk into your apartment, you don't have to
say this is my apartment, everything, you know, you
know, everything is yours. You don't have to acknowledge
that. But if you walk in and all of
a sudden, you know, the table is upturned and
books are all over the place, all of a
sudden that you've moved from everything is right, a
noetic consciousness to everything is wrong. Noetic consciousness is
recognized that and then, you know, oh my God,
they you know, maybe someone's here, they're gonna mug
me you into I noetic. So um a noetic
is very primitive. And for me, I think the
only way to think about it is to in
order to get it into noetic and auto noetic
as Jacque said, you know, it's gotta, it's gotta
be intense to cross that line. But I think
that the, that the feeling of rightness that he
talked about is not something that is just down
there. I think it's also something that exists at
a higher level uh in the medial prefrontal cortex
that all mammals share. It's a kind, I think
it's a kind of consciousness, all mammals share. It's
this sense that you know, everything is right until
it's not right. And once it's not right, we
have more complicated things to bump it up to.
Uh ANIMALS may have some kind of non verbal
semantic memory that they could bump it up to
a little bit. Uh But with verbal knowledge, you
get much more, you know, fancy stuff going with
it. But anyway, the, the idea that the, the
a noetic is the ver is the fringe of
consciousness that William James talked about. It's stuff that
hovers on the verge of consciousness but is never
conscious or unconscious. It's right there at that, at
that level. And so it's ready to be bumped
up or ready just to stay there. And this
philosopher Bruce Mangan says that the this fringe consciousness,
its job is to translate the deep unconscious into
something that can be made available to consciousness under
certain conditions. So this this a no conscious is
a transition from the deepest, not un inaccessible unconscious.
Only some things can get up there and be
pulled up through a and so
I I mean, by distinguishing between these different kinds
of consciousness, uh what kind of progress can we
make in terms of understa of having a better
understanding of what consciousness is or how it arises
and stuff like that.
So one way to do it that I propose
and it's, you know, it's uh in current biology
in one of these articles. Um THIS is purely
hypothetical, but let's say that if we were to
know more about how these three kinds of consciousness
work in the human brain and knew exactly, you
know, which circuits are involved. For example, let's say
that the auto noetic consciousness, self consciousness um is
requires the lateral frontal pole, which exists as a
unique structure present only in the human brain. And
to the extent that many people think that the
philosopher scientists think that this kind of auto noetic
self reflective consciousness may be on the human, that
might be a good candidate to look for that
kind of consciousness in. But we're just talking about
speculation. Now, let's say that the unique part of
the human brain is where we have this unique
kind of auto noetic consciousness not alone. Of course,
you need hippocampus for episodic memories and, and all
of that and you gotta get them through many
steps to get them to the, the uh on
a frontal pole. Um But we also know that
there's some evidence in humans that uh for work
for kinds of consciousness like semantic consciousness. Uh YOU
know, can you see consciously see an app, do
you need only visual cortex to consciously see the
apple? That would be the first order theory like
ned block or do you need prefrontal cortex in
order to turn that into a conscious representation? Uh
THAT would be higher order theory. Uh It would
also be the kind of theory that uh people
like Carl Frisson talk about because he says it's
all a kind of top down illusion that would
be kind of working memory illusion, you know about
it. So uh a and global workspace says you
need at least a a cognitive representation to rebroadcast
it back to the other areas and so forth.
So the the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex which plays a
key role in all that stuff um is only
in primates. So that might be a kind of
noetic consciousness that we have using dorsal lateral prefrontal
cortex that includes verbal noetic awareness, verbal, semantic aware,
conceptual semantic awareness. But in monkeys who have almost
identical dorset prefrontal cortex uh in terms of structure,
uh that might be nonverbal semantic and conceptual knowledge.
But other at other mammals don't have this do
lateral granular prefrontal cortex. Also the frontal pole is
granular prefrontal cortex. The rest of animals including us
have a granular or disc granular whatever you wanna
call it, uh prefrontal cortex that all mammals share.
So that might be the kind of cortex that
allows these a noetic crude string of consciousness feelings
to be shared by all mammals. And that is
exactly what JP Up said. It's the kind of
thing that is shared by all mammals. He wouldn't
put it in the media prefrontal cortex, he'd put
it in the sub cortex, but that's the only
difference between our views. Um So we got, we
got uh mammalian consciousness shared by all mammals, primate
consciousness shared by all primates. And, you know, maybe
human consciousness perhaps shared by great apes. We don't
know what's going on in their brains because it's
illegal to study uh ape brains, you know. So
I think it's a, it's a good kind of
way to uh kind of retrofit or reverse engineer
consciousness and other animals based on what we can
expect in our brains. So if we can kind
of like test for what, how far rats can
go beyond this a noetic feeling, then they might
get into kind of some semantic uh nonverbal semantic,
ratlike, not, not primate, like but ratlike, semantic uh
um noetic or I don't know, it's just the
speculation.
So let me just ask you then one final
question. And you've already touched a little bit on
this throughout the conversation. When you mentioned, for example,
that the way we conceptualize things, the way we
talk about things, the way we talk about the
mind mental states, mental experiences are sometimes problematic or
might become obstacles in the way that we understand
these different kinds of realms of existence there, relationship
and so on. Phenomena like consciousness, I guess in
the book, you claim at a certain point that
ideas like the self are increasingly barriers to discovery
and understanding and that we've sort of hit an
epistemological wall. So what do you mean exactly by
that? And if we've really hit this epistemological wall,
how can we go beyond that obstacle?
Yeah. So, you know, again, this goes back to
the issue of what we should take from philosophy
and what we shouldn't take it. You know, so
just because we got this, this notion of the
self from philosophers doesn't mean that everything a philosopher
says about the self is golden and you know,
it written in stone. So the self is a
good starting point. But even scientists have, you know,
come to think of it um in ways that
I think are not productive. So there are two
ways to, to think of the self one productive
and the other not productive. The unproductive one I
think is when we reify it as a kind
of thing inside of something besides who we are.
That, you know it, oh, that, you know, myself,
did it or that I have this thing in
me that does things, um, but what, what is
the self in there besides you? Why do you
need something besides you? Why do you need a
self as a separate thing in charge? You know,
because you, they're related to executive function but, but
it's, it's just adding a, uh, a thing we
don't need, you have executive function. You don't need
a self with the victim. It's, but you have
executive function, not yourself. The self is like a
little ghost in there that's giving us a lot
of trouble. The one way that the self is,
I think scientifically valid is uh the narrative self
because we do narrate who we are and those
narrations become part of our understanding. We can narrate,
we can re narrate, we can change our narration.
But these narrations become beliefs. Sometimes the beliefs become
so strong that that counter evidence to the contrary
is rejected. We see this a lot in, in
politics on both sides these days and a lot
of things, things are so firmly believed that that
nobody gives on anything. And um so those are,
those are all narratives that we cultural narratives, you
know, there are all kinds of narratives, narratives, family
narratives, personal narratives, cultural narratives. Um And we, it's
amazing we get along at all because we have
so many ideas about how, who we are and
who we're not. I'm trying to write a book
now on how, uh you know, like it's kind
of a memoir with about how uh I've narrated
my life over the course of it and what
I, what I think of my narration now that
I was narrating back then.
Well, I'm very much looking forward to it. And
uh the book is again the four realms of
existence, a new theory of being human. I'm leaving
a link to it in the description of the
interview. So
I prefer a new framework for being human. The
publisher insisted I say new theory. Oh,
ok.
Oh, ok. People think that's too pretentious. Very good.
Yeah,
great, great. So, Doctor Lulu, thank you so much
for always. Great talking to you Ricardo. Really fun.
I always try anytime. Just I'm always happy.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights Learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in Nai
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel, Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall, her
MA J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith. Tom Hummel S friends, David
Sloan Wilson Yaar, Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani
Charlotte, Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavla Stassi na
Me, Gary G Alman, Sam of Zal Ari and
YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas
Fry Franka Gilon Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary FTD
and W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke
Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo David
Williams Di A Costa Anton Erickson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Fists, Larry Dey
Junior, Old Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey, then Spur by
Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick
Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley
Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No. Week in the B
brand Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine
Steinman, Perlis, Kate Von Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan
Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough,
Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers
is our web, Jim Frank Lucani, Tom Vig and
Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Rumble, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carl Negro, Nick Ortiz and
Nick Golden. And to my executive producers Matthew Lavender,
Sergi, Adrian Bogdan Knit and Rosie. Thank you for
all.